And now the snakes are on the alert.
This is the best feeding opportunity
they will get all year.
On flat ground, a baby iguana can outrun
a race of snake.
But others are waiting in ambush.
Another hatchling has its first glimpse
of a dangerous world.
A snake's eyes aren't very good, but
they can detect movement.
So, if the hatchling keeps its nerve, it
may just avoid detection.
Heat.
Heat. Heat.
A near miraculous escape.
The lucky survivors could begin learning
the unique way of life demanded by this
hostile island.
Wolves. These in northern Canada are the
largest and most powerful in the world,
[music] and they're setting out to hunt.
The pack is 25 strong, a sign that the
prey they're seeking is formidable.
These bison are even [music] bigger than
their southern cousins and the largest
land animals in North America.
For generations, wolves and bison here
have been shaped by their battles with
each other, making each the most
impressive of its kind.
The bison will not stay long among the
trees. They're not safe here.
[music]
The wolves are closing in, but their
chance of ambushing the bison in the
woods has passed. Their prey are now in
the open and grouped together for
safety.
The wolves will need to work as a team
if they're to make a kill.
They circle the herd, trying to unsettle
it and split it up. But the bison are
armed and dangerous. They will be safe
as long as they stick together.
The wolves up their game, harrying the
herd, a ploy to trigger a stampede and
split away one of the smaller ones.
The bison form a defensive circle around
their young, horns pointing outwards.
The wolves need a bison to break rank.
But the tables are turning and now the
[music] wolves have to retreat.
The pack focus their attention on the
rear of the herd and the bison begin to
panic.
>> [music]
[music]
>> A young bison falls behind.
>> [music]
>> Even this yearling dwarfs the wolves.
Running head down the herd's only
thought is escape.
A stroke of luck for the wolves.
The kill will feed the pack for several
days, but then they will have to resume
the chase.
Their cover blown,
escape seems impossible.
But these particular fish have a unique
ability.
[music]
They're flying fish.
>> [music]
[music]
>> With an extra thrust from their tails,
the flying fish get airborne once more.
With a good wind, they can glide for
hundreds of meters.
[music]
But this is just what the frigot birds
have been waiting for.
When frigots join the hunt, the flying
fish are literally caught between the
devil
and the deep blue sea.
If the flying fish get too much lift,
they become easy prey for the frigots.
>> [music]
>> If they dive to evade attack from above,
they could fall into the mouths of the
Dorado.
[music]
Mantids will eat anything that moves,
including other mantids.
Time to leave.
This tiny insect is now open to attack
from predators lurking in the
undergrowth.
Whether an individual mantis survives or
not is partly a matter of chance.
Whether it's spotted by a predator,
whether it turns right
or left.
So far, its luck has held.
But this hungry jumping spider is still
in pursuit.
A mantis is born with exceptional
eyesight,
but the spiders is even better.
Although this young mantis can't yet
fly, its long four legs evolved to catch
prey give it reach.
There seems to be no escape.
But this mantis has a surprising line in
self-defense.
Kung fu praying mantis style.
Of course, it's all bluff
trying to look bigger and confuse its
enemy,
but it's got away with it.
Just staying alive for its first few
hours is a significant accomplishment
for a newly hatched insect.
But there's still a long way to go. With
a bit of luck, in two months time, it
will be as big and beautiful as this
orchid mounted.
Or maybe not.
After all, mantids are cannibals.
However, there are plenty more where
that one came from.
At this time of year, polar bears on
average succeed only once in [music] 20
hunts.
If the hunter is skinny like this one,
that may not be often enough.
All she can do is keep trying.
[music]
To prevent her scent betraying her, she
makes a wide sweep to get downwind of
the seal. Getting
close.
She's now right behind the seal.
Incredibly, She caught the seal
underwater.
It's only small, but even so, its
blubber alone will contain 100,000
calories, enough to sustain this bear
for a week.
And in that time, she might even catch
another.
But this can't go on forever. As summer
continues, temperatures are rising.
Each hunt requires [music] more energy,
draining the bears of their reserves.
Kenya, famous for its big cats, the
supreme hunters.
Cheetahs specialize in hunting [music]
at speed. Though fast, they're fragile
creatures built to sprint after small
[music] prey.
They don't have the strength or weight
of a lion to bring down larger animals.
This male is different. He doesn't hunt
alone. He's [music] learned that there
is strength in numbers.
But here there are not just two but
three cheaters.
A band of brothers.
They have changed their tactics and by
doing so have taken their prey by
surprise.
They have learned that working together
[music] they can bring down large prey.
An ostrich,
a bird that towers over a cheetah and is
more than twice as heavy.
It can't fly to escape danger, but it
can lash out with a deadly kick.
A female unaware as yet of any danger.
Even with three of them, this is still
highly risky. If one gets injured, the
other two couldn't hope to tackle such
large prey.
On the other hand, if they get it right,
the rewards are huge.
The male has spotted one of the
brothers, but only one.
It's not too worried.
Then suddenly [music] there are three.
The female is slower to realize the
danger and the cheaters switch targets.
It takes the combined [music] effort and
weight of all three brothers.
to bring down this powerful bird. Even
now, the ostrich [music] could land a
fatal kick.
So far, the brothers are winning.
Ostriches have yet to find a way to foil
such techniques.
Food is so hard to find this far north
that a wolf pack must search hundreds of
square kilometers if it's to be
successful.
And success means raising the next
generation.
To do that here, the wolves must work
together.
So the young are raised not only by
their parents but by their aunts and
uncles as well.
Together they try to ensure that each
pup reaches near adult size before the
snow returns.
A growing pup needs more than just a few
levers.
The wolves need bigger prey. And to
catch that,
they must hunt as a pack.
Adult hairs may be easy to spot, but
they're far from easy to catch.
They run at 60 km an hour.
To catch one, the wolves work as a team.
>> [music]
[music]
>> One of them gets close enough to bite
the hair's tail.
But a hair can change direction in an
instant.
If it can [music] continue to sidestep
and it may ultimately outlast
them.
Finally, it gets away.
For the next hair, the whole pack gives
chase.
>> [music]
>> Now numbers count.
The lead wolves keep up the pace. Others
run on either side so the hair can't
change direction.
A tiny meal for the whole pack. Even
when more sea lions arrive, they can't
seem to break down the sardines
coordinated defenses.
With a shaw this big, the sea lions need
to isolate a smaller, more manageable
group of fish.
But with so few predators, the fish
still have the advantage.
All the sea lions can do is keep the
sardines at the surface and wait for
others to join them.
Tuna,
their arrival changes everything.
Tuna attack from below, cutting off the
sardines escape route down to deep
water.
Next to appear, she waters. Excellent
flyers, but also surprisingly agile
underwater.
With so many predators attacking from
[music] all sides, the advantage starts
to shift away from the sardines.
[music]
As the fish pack ever tighter, their
shing strategy now makes it easier for
the hunters.
[bell]
Copper sharks.
They've scented blood in the water.
Surprisingly perhaps, the predators
never attack one another. They work
together to corral the ball of fish,
taking turns to grab a mouthful,
common dolphins.
As the shell gets ever smaller, each
sardine scrambles desperately to hide in
the middle. But now there's no escape.
>> [music]
>> A Buddha's whale finishes off the feast.
Tons of sardines devoured in less than
an hour.
During the dry season, over half a
million turns crowded onto this remote
atal in the Indian Ocean.
Their chicks are still in their dark
juvenile plumage.
They vary in age.
Whilst the more advanced chicks take to
the air,
others aren't quite ready yet.
Those
[music]
just starting to learn to fly use the
shallow lagoon that occupies the center
of the at their training ground.
It's difficult for some of them to stay
aloft for long.
Giant trivalis.
Usually they are solitary hunters, but
about 50 of them have come here from
neighboring reefs, attracted by this
abundance of potential prey.
The fledglings stay out of the water if
they can.
They even drink on the wing.
If the Talia are to catch one now, they
have to up their game.
So there is a fish here that amazingly
has a brain capable of calculating the
air speed, altitude and trajectory of a
bird.
The time comes when every fledgling has
to take to the air and collect food for
itself.
Their
parents lead them to the training
grounds.
Heat. Heat. [music]
[music]
Heat. Heat.
If they are to survive,
they must learn quickly.
After a month of practicing over the
lagoon, the youngsters start to leave
and take their chances out over the open
sea. But leopards are the most versatile
of all the big cats, adept at finding
cover in the most unpromising places.
The steep walls of the gully are now her
cover for an ambush.
The male puku is close enough, but he's
too big to tackle.
She needs to slip past him without being
seen.
If he spots her, he'll blow her cover.
Slowly does it
to succeed Here she needs to find prey
grazing close to the edge
or better still in the gully itself.
frustration.
Success would have saved off hunger for
a week,
but while there's prey around, there's
hope.
Peeking over the top is a risk, but it's
the quickest way to find a new target.
A burst of speed of 65 km an hour and
it's all over in less than 6 seconds.
Except it isn't.
Dazed and disorientated, the Impala
makes a miraculous escape.
The Namib Desert, one of the most
exposed places on Earth.
As the sun climbs high, everybody takes
cover from the extreme heat.
Everybody except
the hot rod ant.
As others take refuge,
their day is just beginning.
Cleaning out the nest,
the sand can reach a scorching 70
centrade.
The ants long legs raise their bodies
above the surface where it's 10° cooler.
But if they stand still, they will fry.
They must keep moving or risk the same
fate as their quarry. The creatures that
have collapsed from heat stroke.
Too deeply buried but a good place to
cool off.
Foraging decisions must be fast.
Too big.
Perfect.
back to the nest before they also die.
But they've strayed into a minefield.
Each of these strange cone-shaped pits
is a death trap
with a brutal predator at its center.
Here lie ant lion lvi, tiny ambush
predators with venomfilled pinces.
Some ants manage to escape, but the ant
lion has other tricks.
Flinging sand into the air, it creates
an avalanche.
In this cone of death, the walls are so
angled that the sand slips beneath the
ant's feet.
As boulders rain from the sky, escape
seems almost impossible.
[music]
Phew.
Not much remains of the porpus after the
whales are through with it.
Killer whales don't just target prey
smaller than themselves.
Off the coast of California, a grey
whale and her baby are in serious
danger.
Once again, computer images give the
underwater view of an extraordinary
hunt.
The grey whale calf is just a few weeks
old. It's following its mother north
towards the summer feeding grounds in
Alaska.
They've reached Mterrey Bay where a deep
trench cuts in from the sea.
As they move beyond the trench wall, the
grey whales lose their cover.
Out in the bay, the killer whales are
listening for that telltale sound, the
breathing of a great whale.
Immediately, their behavior changes. The
killers close ranks like a hunting wolf
pack.
The killer whales have caught up with
the mother and calf
and now the chase is on.
The grey whales try to outswim their
attackers.
Fast swimming pushes up the grey whale's
breathing rate. A breathless calf is
easier to catch.
The killers work as a team.
Their first goal is to separate the baby
from its mother.
[music]
The grey whale mother is a formidable
adversary.
She could seriously harm a killer whale
with just one slap of her massive tail
fluke.
One of the attackers pushes between
mother and calf.
[music]
>> [music]
>> The strategy is working. The grey whales
are forced apart.
With the baby separated, the killer
[music] whales change strategy. Now
their goal is to drown the calf.
>> [music]
>> For sea lions to venture into deep water
here is very dangerous indeed. It's much
safer to stay in the shallows if they
can.
In one or two places, [music] channels
enable the whales to get really close to
the beach. Those are the danger spots.
To get off the beach, the killer has to
thrash its body.
No other whale deliberately beaches
itself in this way or has perfected this
method of getting back to the sea.
As long as the sea lions stay well up
the beach, you might think they would be
safe, but the hungry whales are very
daring.
Now, several of the whales are hunting
in a group.
That sea lion was keeping just ahead of
one of the whales, but was caught by
another it probably hadn't seen.
Heat. Heat.
This savage beating may be to separate
hide from flesh.
The army ant.
This may look like a ball of a million
individuals, but make no mistake,
the colony acts as one.
A super organism [music] with a sensory
system of 2 million antenni.
A skeleton made from the living bodies
of workers.
A defense system of soldier ants
ready to act at any sign of danger.
A digestive system processing piles of
food deep inside.
Even a coordinated system [music] for
dealing with all the waste.
These are insects that [music] by
working together transcend individual
size.
The colony can search the entire jungle
and flush out its [music] wildlife.
Each day it sends [music] out a silent
probe into the forest in quest of food.
It doesn't use scouts like other ants.
Instead, a vast search party pushes into
virgin territory.
Seeking out the signs of anything alive.
They spread out along a 10 m front,
sweeping across the forest floor.
To find prey, the ants must first touch
it.
The irony is that this, the most
successful hideandsek player in the
forest, is almost completely blind.
It distinguishes the living only by
their movement.
As long as an animal remains still, it
is safe.
But the slightest twitch will give it
away.
[music]
Within seconds, the prey is pinned down.
Within minutes, it's torn apart at its
joints.
The more the prey struggles, the more
the ants engage.
Right across the raid front, prey of all
sizes are driven from their hiding
places.
Even wasps must abandon their homes when
the ants arrive.
Everything alive in the path of the
raiders, overwhelmed
by sheer numbers.
It's called Darwin's bark spider, and
the female has a remarkable strategy.
[snorts]
>> [music]
>> Like a real life spiderw woman, she
sprays strands of silk in one long
continuous [music]
flow.
The threads fan out like a sail and
drift on air currents blowing across the
water.
Every few seconds, she crimps the
strands together to stop them spreading
too widely.
The breeze will do the rest, blowing the
threads into a single line [music] and a
25 m bridge.
Now she must reinforce her bridge
because her web will hang from it.
But there's something bouncing the line
at the other end.
Another Darwin spider is trying to take
advantage of her hard work.
She must deal with the intruder head on.
The cut line is an inconvenience. but no
more than that.
With hooks on the tips [music] of each
leg, she gathers in the thread.
It won't go to waste as she'll eat it
later.
When it's all reeled in, she sprays
again.
Outstreams another 25 m bridging line.
How a spider no bigger than a thumbnail
can produce so much silk so quickly has
baffled scientists.
And it's no ordinary silk. It's the
toughest natural fiber on the planet,
tougher than steel,
and it needs to be tough to span the
wide river.
With the bridge [music] tort and the
ground anchor in place, it's time to
construct her trap.
These spiders [music] can build the
world's largest orb webs up to 2 m wide.
A few hours from the first spray of
bridging line, the job is done.
Now her strategy is simple.
Sit and wait.
[music] And there's one final bout of
silk production.
shrink wrapping her food for later.
A Sally Lightfoot crab.
One of thousands of shore crabs just
waiting for their moment.
Every day they gather on the tropical
shores of Brazil,
waiting for the tide to go out.
which exposes their feeding grounds.
Seaweed covered rocks 100 m from the
shore.
Getting there is a race against the
tide.
They leap from rock to rock.
These crabs seem to be afraid of the
water.
And for good reason,
the Moray eel,
the chain
is a specialist crab hunter.
Its blunt teeth can easily grip and
crush a crab's shell.
It's the crab's deadliest enemy.
But the crabs feeding grounds are still
a long way off.
They must press on.
Halfway.
[music]
But their enemy has other ideas.
Crossing the land
to reset the ambush.
To feed, the crabs must keep going.
But nowhere is safe.
An octopus. Also a crab killer.
The crabs make a dash for it.
made it.
Risking life and limb to graze on these
seaweed pastures.
>> [music]
>> But in 2 hours time when the tide starts
to turn,
they will have to run the gauntlet all
over again.
It's July in the deserts of Nevada in
the western United States,
the hottest time of the year.
Bands of wild horses, Mustang, are
converging on one of the last remaining
water holes around.
Now water not only offers them the
chance to drink, it can also bring
power.
[clears throat]
If a stallion can control access to
water, he will have secured mating
rights to the entire herd.
So stallions try to dominate these
pools, fighting off rivals who venture
too close.
a stranger.
He's traveled 15 kilometers [music] to
be here because the pools where he's
come from have already dried up.
With him come his females.
If he can't provide them with water,
they will leave him for the white
stallion who already dominates this
[music] pool.
>> So he will have to fight.
[snorts]
Fire.
There is everything to lose.
A broken leg or a shattered jaw would
mean a slow and painful death.
[music]
>> [music]
>> A missed kick and it's all over.
The new arrival has won.
And his prize is more than just a chance
to drink. He has provided for his herd
and in the process stolen his rival
females.
>> [snorts]
>> The White Stallion's rule is over.
[laughter]
These males are the troop leaders.
They hold all the power here.
Joining them is every young male's
ambition.
To be accepted into this elite is the
path to privilege, but it's a dangerous
journey.
The youngster decides to follow.
At first, he has enough sense to keep
his distance.
These males are twice his size.
>> [laughter]
>> The low ranking chimps retreat before
the troop leaders arrive at the water
hole.
[groaning]
Dominant males have a highly stressful
life as they constantly squabble to
protect their position.
>> [screaming]
>> The youngster can't take his eyes off
them.
[screaming]
This is his chance to get himself
noticed.
If he can impress even one of the big
males with a show of strength, he might
just be accepted into their ranks.
[laughter]
His
best attempt at a macho display has
certainly [laughter] caught their
attention,
[screaming]
but they are not impressed.
>> [screaming]
>> In fact, this drumming means they're
getting rather angry
and they attack.
The youngster is not quick enough.
[screaming]
He gets a short sharp lesson about how
hard it can be to break into this
close-knit gang.
He's lucky to escape with just an
injured hand.
[laughter]
[screaming]
For the moment, he's neither big enough
nor strong enough to be taken seriously
by the troop leaders.
Without status, he will never enjoy the
privileges of the best food or the
attention of females.
Losing its fear of humans has enabled
one animal to spread into cities
everywhere and in huge numbers.
Pigeons are by far the most successful
urban bird. Here
in Albi in the south of France, the
pigeons come to the river to bathe.
They need to prein their flight
feathers, clean off the city dust,
and cool themselves down.
But death lies in weight.
A predator that has taken advantage of
the very thing that has led to the
pigeon success.
Their lack of fear.
As the pigeons bathe, oil from their
plumage flows downstream and is
detected.
A monstrous Wells catfish
introduced here just 40 years ago. They
have proliferated,
virtually exterminated the local fish
stocks,
and they've now developed a taste for
pigeon.
Their eyesight is poor, so they use
their barbles to sense the movements of
their victims.
Heat. Heat.
Heat up
here.
This is a radical new hunting strategy
for what is normally a bottomdwelling
fish.
After a thousand years of living in this
city, pigeons are now having to learn to
avoid a fish.
A lone gravis zebra.
He weighs close to half a ton and could
go for 3 days without drinking.
Like the macaks, his forebears were
refugees from the advancing Sahara.
The land is scrubby and dry.
But this stallion has claimed it as his
own.
He's been waiting months for visitors.
Female visitors.
If they like his territory, they might
stay a while.
It's his first chance to mate for a very
long time.
Hardly a success.
Perhaps his visitors are looking for a
more impressive partner. [snorts]
There's another setback.
The females were being followed. A posy
of young males. Everyone arrival.
It's time to separate the men from the
boys.
[music]
One by one, the stallion seized them
off.
[laughter]
The females had ringside seats
and his prowess has not gone unnoted.
Machismo gives way to tenderness
[snorts]
around here. You have to take every
opportunity be it for food, for water or
for mates.
Female gravies are a fickle bunch. The
herd have decided to move on.
All of them.
The stallion may never see them again,
but there's a chance that one is now
carrying his fo.
[music]
In a far corner of Southeast Asia lies
the coral triangle,
a cluster of the richest coral reefs in
the world.
>> [music]
>> Undersea cities crammed full of life.
As in any crowded metropolis, there is
fierce rivalry for space,
for food,
and for a partner.
But the reef is also a place full of
opportunity.
[music]
A cuttlefish.
It specializes in hunting crabs.
But a large crab is a dangerous quarry.
It has powerful claws.
The cuttlefish, however, has a
remarkable talent.
Its skin contains millions of pigment
cells with which it can create ever
changing colors and patterns.
>> [music]
>> And that apparently hypnotizes the crab.
[music]
A cuttlefish may be clever, but a shark
is bigger
and it eats cuttlefish.
Time to disappear.
>> [music]
>> Back to the hunt.
A new target, but the same memeing
technique.
For those that manage to establish
themselves in these bustling undersea
[music] cities, there can be great
rewards. [snorts]
This is a poison dart frog.
Males raise their young in a very
special way.
A father will place each one of his
tadpoles in its own tiny pool of water.
This is one. Nice and safe.
He might have up to five other tadpoles,
but he needs to remember where he put
each one of them.
This one isn't doing so well.
Its tiny puddle has all but dried out.
The tadpo will die unless its father can
find a better place for it.
If dads are good for one thing,
it's piggyback [music] rides.
Fathers are no bigger than a human
thumbnail, but this enables them to get
to places that others can't.
This could be perfect.
The only problem is that there's no food
here.
Fathers need help.
Somewhere in this forest
is
mom.
A female could do something a male
cannot.
But first, dad must lead his partner to
their hungry tadpole. [music]
and mother deals with the problem.
She lays a single unfertilized egg.
and her tadpole gets a much needed meal.
For the next 6 weeks, parents continue
their rounds. An extraordinary test of
teamwork and memory.
Sailfish, 3 m long, are closing in on
prey.
They will only use just enough energy to
make their kill, never wasting a fin
stroke.
Nearly 100 sailfish have surrounded a
single school of bait fish. It's very
rare to see so many of these hunters in
one place.
To herd their prey, the predators
[music] raise their huge dorsal fins.
A mistimed strike by one sailfish
[music] could fatally damage another,
but each continually changes its color
from blue to striped to black. That
warns its companions of its intentions
and also confuses the prey.
As the shaw [music] is driven nearer the
surface, it comes within the range of
the seabirds.
Out here in the open ocean, there is
nowhere for the bait fish to hide.
Sailfish live a high octane life. To
survive, they must find prey daily.
So, their entire existence will be spent
on the move.
And many animals here choose the
simplest option of all.
Staying hidden all day and only
venturing out in the cool of the night.
As darkness falls, animals appear from
seemingly nowhere.
And among them inevitably
are hunters.
One of the most voracious nocturnal
predators is also one of the hardest to
see.
This mysterious creature hardly ever
appears on the surface of the dunes,
but there are signs on the sand that can
give it away.
It lives only here where the sand grains
are so perfectly dry and polished that
they flow almost like water.
It's no bigger than a pingpong ball,
a golden mole.
It's totally blind,
but there's nothing to see underground
anyway.
Instead, it has superb hearing.
Its entire head acts as an amplifier
that picks up vibrations through the
sand. So to locate prey on the surface
of the dune, it has paradoxically to
thrust its face into the dune.
Termites
not easy to catch when you're blind.
>> [music]
>> Far better to go into stealth mode.
Once below the sand, it can [music]
detect the slightest movement,
allowing it to strike with pinpoint
accuracy.
Well, most of the time.
It can travel a kilometer a night
[music] in search of its dinner.
And right now, it has just detected its
main course.
Little wonder is sometimes called the
shark of the dunes.
Lizards, for the most part, are not
known for being caring parents, but
there are exceptions.
It's spring in the woodlands of North
America. An American robin is nesting,
warming her eggs with the heat generated
by her own body.
And below on the forest floor,
[laughter] a fiveelined skink is warming
her cold blooded body by basking in the
sunshine so that she can do the same
thing.
She has a nest below the lock.
It can get quite chilly in these
woodlands. And she warms her eggs by
transferring to them the heat that she's
collected from the sun.
She takes just as much care of her eggs
as the rotten does.
A month later and her eggs are hatching.
The robin's eggs have hatched, too. Her
nestlings are helpless and need constant
feeding.
The young skinks, however, are already
capable of finding food for themselves.
Within a day or so, they've left their
mother and are independently exploring
the woodland floor for themselves.
Back in the Australian rainforest, this
weaver ant fortress sits at the heart of
a rich territory.
Hunting parties go out to gather food to
fuel their growing numbers.
[music]
Some canopy caterpillars are not killed
but farmed by the ants. They exude a
sugary secretion that the ants collect.
In return, the ants mount a guard to
protect the caterpillar wherever it
goes.
But a successful colony inevitably
attracts enemies.
This jumping spider's body shape
resembles that of an ant.
A disguise good enough to fool these
nursery guards.
It's after one of the colony's most
valuable assets,
the grubs.
In a colony numbering tens of thousands,
a single grub is an insignificant loss.
But the rich territory of a successful
colony draws more destructive enemies.
Raiders from a neighboring weaver ant
colony looking to expand their own
empire.
Invaders are quickly spotted.
The guard releases pherommones to alert
the rest of the colony.
They stream out of the nest to defend
their home.
>> [music]
>> If the home defenses fail,
the colony will be wiped out.
[music]
Some of the defenders deploy their most
potent weapon. They squirt formic acid.
The stinging liquid halts the invaders
in their tracks.
And now the home guard can go on the
offensive.
Home and territory are secure once
again.
A colony may lose many workers in
defense of its home,
but their sacrifice helps safeguard the
next generation.
It's now midsummer, and the sun is
shining at full strength.
The increasing warmth is the cue for an
Atlantic lobster to start on a long
journey. She spent the winter 250 m down
far beyond the reach of the storms,
but it was cold down there and now she
needs to find warmer water. So she's
marching towards the shallows.
They however are 150 kilome away.
After a month of walking, she finally
arrives at her favorite sandbank.
But she's not the first here. Dozens of
other lobsters have already dug
themselves homes in the sand, and they
don't intend to surrender [music] them
to newcomers.
>> [music]
>> size counts for everything in these
battles. The new arrival is in urgent
need of a pit. And since she weighs a
hefty 7 kilos, [music] she stands a good
chance of getting one.
She's won.
These battles continue for the next two
months, and they're crucial for the
females must have both shelter and warm
water if they [music] are to raise their
young.
For the last 7 months, each of these
females has been carrying around about
20,000 [music]
fertilized eggs, but their task is
approaching its end. The warmth of the
shallows is speeding the egg's
development.
Two more months and the eggs are ready
to hatch.
[music]
At first, they're not very good at
swimming,
but within a few minutes, the babies are
able to set off in a purposeful way.
This is one of them. From the purposeful
way in which he's walking, it's clear
that the search for prey has started.
The other members of the team are not
far away.
They've been steadily following the
monkeys for about 20 minutes, looking
for an opportunity.
The technique they'll almost certainly
use is that one of them will be driving
the colibus ahead of him. Then there
will be others that go up on either side
who are the blockers who won't make any
attempt to catch the monkeys. And then
there are chasers who go and grab at the
monkey if they can. And finally, there's
one male who will go up ahead and ambush
it. So, uh, bringing the whole trap
close.
The monkeys are now getting alarmed.
A driver is going up to prevent the
group from settling and to drive them
towards an area where they're more
easily trapped.
That's That's one of the blockers that's
now quietly come ahead of the colibus.
He's halfway up the tree now.
He's deliberately making himself
conspicuous.
Now it looks as though they're all in
position. The driver's gone up. The
blockers have gone up. And now the one
who's going to make the ambush and close
the ring, he's gone up too. Calibus will
be very lucky if they escape now.
[screaming]
>> They got one.
>> [screaming]
>> The hunters are tearing it apart.
[screaming]
Everyone, the hunters in the trees and
the spectators on the ground are
screaming with excitement.
[screaming]
>> [screaming]
>> And now the kill is bought down so that
the females and others can share it.
And there's the reward for that long
chase. The divided body of a colibus
monkey.
These
bloodstained faces
may well horrify us, but we might also
see in them the face of our longdistant
hunting ancestors.
And if we are appalled
by that mob violence and blood lust, we
might also see in that too perhaps the
origins of the teamwork
that have in the end brought human
beings many of their greatest triumphs.
This is the South African dwarf
chameleon, a male in full courtship
costume.
This somewhat less colorful is a female.
She is not welcoming his advances.
As her mood darkens, so does her skin.
She's driven him away. But why?
There is a reason
she's pregnant. Her home, the South
African Cape, can get quite cold.
So instead of laying her eggs on the
ground as most chameleons do, she
retains them within her body and warms
them by seeking out the sunniest places
and sunbathing.
Now they're ready to emerge alive.
Producing babies in the branches might
seem to be a risky business. But the
membrane enclosing each one will stick
to a twig if it hits one.
[music]
And when at last the babies disentangle
themselves, they immediately deploy
their formidable chameleon grip.
>> [music]
>> By the time they are properly dried out,
The babies are as much at home in the
branches as their mother.
Out here on the sand flats, there is
safe accommodation for some.
A family of saddleback clown fish have
found an excellent home.
The tentacles of this carpet anemone can
kill,
but the clown fish are immune to the
poison,
so they can shelter from danger.
In return, the fish keep the anemone
clean of debris.
As with all clown fish, the family is
ruled by a big female.
Her white face marks her out as the
boss.
The dimminitive male has to prove his
worth, so he works tirelessly
removing debris and generally keeping on
top of the housework. His
greatest challenge is to find a safe
place where the boss can lay her eggs.
But there's nothing solid here for the
female to lay them on.
A nearby shell could be the solution.
If only he can move it to the protection
of the anemone.
too heavy.
Besides, it has a mind of its own.
Hermit crab.
But out here twice a day, the anemone is
swept by tidal currents and they bring
in new opportunities.
An old plastic bottle.
Perhaps this will do.
Not heavy enough.
A coconut shell.
It looks just right,
but it's a long way from home.
And he can't move it by himself.
so prepare. I'll work together.
>> [music]
>> a Little adjustment to the anemous
tentacles in order to clear a space for
it
and the shell is tucked in.
The female lays a safe nursery at last.
[music]
He has proved himself worthy to father
her young and he fertilizes them.
Now he will meticulously tend the eggs,
keeping them clean and healthy until
they hatch
in 10 days I'm
60 million tons of snow now blanket this
herd's territory.
Pushing through deep snow is exhausting
work and the bison are now slowly
starving.
Just keeping warm saps huge amounts of
energy.
Their thick coats can insulate them down
to minus30 Celsius.
It's now -40.
The only thing that will keep them alive
is buried beneath a meter of snow.
And that's a problem shared with a
surprising neighbor.
The food the fox seeks is also deep
beneath the snow.
The survival of both creatures depends
on getting through to the ground.
For the bison, it will be a matter of
brute strength.
Massive neck muscles enable them to
shovel 5 tons of snow a day.
Their lightweight neighbor needs more
precision.
The bison have reached their goal. a
mouthful of withered grass.
And where the bison have dug, the fox
now spots an opportunity.
Every footstep counts,
but he mustn't break through
yet.
He listens carefully to pinpoint his
target.
It's moving.
A vole,
small, but 100 times more nutritious
than a mouthful of dried grass.
to get through the winter on these
prairies. Sometimes brain beats brawn.